--- PAGE 1 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271 
Internal dispute resolution 
September 2021 
About this guide 
This guide is for Australian financial services (AFS) licensees, unlicensed 
product issuers, unlicensed secondary sellers, trustees of regulated 
superannuation funds (other than self-managed superannuation funds 
(SMSFs)), trustees of approved deposit funds, retirement savings account 
providers, Australian credit licensees (credit licensees) and unlicensed 
carried over instrument lenders (unlicensed COI lenders).  
The standards and requirements highlighted in this guide are enforceable. 
It explains what these financial firms must do to have an internal dispute 
resolution (IDR) system in place that meets ASIC’s standards and 
requirements. 
Note: This guide comes into effect on 5 October 2021. For complaints 
received by financial firms before that date, Regulatory Guide 165 Licensing: 
Internal and external dispute resolution (RG 165) applies. We will withdraw 
RG 165 on 5 October 2022. 
This guide should be read in conjunction with Regulatory Guide 267 
Oversight of the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (RG 267).

--- PAGE 2 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 2 
About ASIC regulatory documents 
In administering legislation ASIC issues the following types of regulatory 
documents. 
Consultation papers: seek feedback from stakeholders on matters ASIC 
is considering, such as proposed relief or proposed regulatory guidance. 
Regulatory guides: give guidance to regulated entities by: 
 explaining when and how ASIC will exercise specific powers under 
legislation (primarily the Corporations Act) 
 explaining how ASIC interprets the law 
 describing the principles underlying ASIC’s approach 
 giving practical guidance (e.g. describing the steps of a process such 
as applying for a licence or giving practical examples of how 
regulated entities may decide to meet their obligations). 
Information sheets: provide concise guidance on a specific process or 
compliance issue or an overview of detailed guidance. 
Reports: describe ASIC compliance or relief activity or the results of a 
research project. 
Document history 
This guide was issued in September 2021 and is based on legislation and 
regulations as at the date of issue. 
Previous versions:  
 Superseded Regulatory Guide 271, issued in July 2020 
 Consultation draft of Regulatory Guide 165 Internal dispute resolution, 
released with Consultation Paper 311 Internal dispute resolution: 
Update to RG 165 
Disclaimer  
This guide does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to seek your 
own professional advice to find out how the Corporations Act, National Credit 
Act, SIS Act and other applicable laws apply to you, as it is your 
responsibility to determine your obligations.

--- PAGE 3 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 3 
Contents 
A Overview ................................................................................................. 4 
Financial services dispute resolution framework ..................................... 4 
ASIC’s role in internal dispute resolution ................................................. 9 
Application of the IDR requirements ......................................................11 
Requirements for IDR processes ..........................................................11 
Transition period ....................................................................................12 
B Application of IDR requirements ........................................................13 
Definition of ‘complaint’ ..........................................................................13 
Definition of ‘complainant’ ......................................................................16 
Outsourcing IDR processes ...................................................................18 
C Maximum IDR timeframes and IDR responses .................................19 
Acknowledgement of complaint .............................................................19 
What an IDR response must contain .....................................................20 
Maximum timeframes for an IDR response ...........................................21 
IDR response requirements for multi-tier IDR processes ......................31 
The role of customer advocates ............................................................32 
Links between the IDR process and AFCA ...........................................33 
D Systemic issues ...................................................................................34 
Examples of systemic issues .................................................................34 
How to manage systemic issues ...........................................................34 
E IDR standards ......................................................................................36 
Basis for the IDR standards ...................................................................36 
Commitment and culture ........................................................................37 
Enabling complaints ...............................................................................37 
Resourcing .............................................................................................39 
Responsiveness ....................................................................................42 
Objectivity and fairness ..........................................................................44 
Policy and procedures ...........................................................................45 
Data collection, analysis and internal reporting .....................................46 
Continuous improvement .......................................................................48 
Key terms .....................................................................................................50 
Related information .....................................................................................55

--- PAGE 4 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 4 
A Overview  
Key points 
Financial firms must have a dispute resolution system that consists of: 
• an internal dispute resolution (IDR) procedure that meets the standards 
or requirements made or approved by ASIC; and 
• membership of the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (AFCA).  
Our dispute resolution standards and requirements are set out in: 
• this guide, which sets out how financial firms must meet their obligations; 
and 
• Regulatory Guide 267 Oversight of the Australian Financial Complaints 
Authority (RG 267), which sets out how we will administer ASIC’s 
powers and perform our oversight role over AFCA. 
We must, when considering whether to make or approve standards or 
requirements relating to IDR, take into account: 
• Australian Standard AS/NZS 10002:2014 Guidelines for complaint 
management in organizations (AS/NZS 10002:2014); and 
• any other matter we consider relevant. 
The standards and requirements highlighted in this guide are enforceable.  
This regulatory guide updates our previous IDR standards and 
requirements to: 
• give effect to the reforms introduced by the Treasury Laws Amendment 
(Putting Consumers First—Establishment of the Australian Financial 
Complaints Authority) Act 2018, which implements the Australian 
Government’s response to the Review of the financial system external 
dispute resolution and complaints framework (Ramsay Review); 
• reflect the requirements for effective complaints handling set out in 
AS/NZS 10002:2014; and 
• refine our requirements in some key areas based on our regulatory 
experience. 
Financial services dispute resolution framework 
RG 271.1 Financial firms must have in place a dispute resolution system that consists of: 
(a) an IDR procedure that complies with standards and requirements made 
or approved by ASIC; and 
(b) membership of AFCA. 
Note 1: See s912A(1)(g) and 1017G(1) of the Corporations Act 2001 (Corporations 
Act), s47(1)(h) and (i) of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 (National 
Credit Act), s101(1) and (1A) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
(SIS Act), and s47(1) and (2) of the Retirement Savings Account Act 1997 (RSA Act).

--- PAGE 5 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 5 
Note 2: Unlicensed carried over instrument lenders (unlicensed COI lenders) have IDR 
obligations, but are not required to be a member of AFCA (see RG 271.3). 
RG 271.2 Most financial firms also have a requirement to comply with their IDR 
procedures: see modified s912A(1)(g) and 1017G(1) of the Corporations 
Act, and modified s47(1)(h) and (i) of the National Credit Act.  
RG 271.3 A modified regulatory regime applies to some unlicensed credit firms. Credit 
representatives and exempt special purpose funding entities (exempt SPFEs) 
(including securitisation bodies) do not have IDR obligations, but must be a 
member of AFCA. Unlicensed carried over instrument lenders (unlicensed 
COI lenders) have IDR obligations but are not required to be a member of 
AFCA. 
Note: See s64 and 65 of the National Credit Act, and regs 23B and 23C of the National 
Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010 (National Credit Regulations); see also 
reg 25E of the National Credit Regulations and s47(1)(e) of the National Credit Act 
(inserted by Sch 2 to the National Credit Regulations). 
RG 271.4 Table 1 sets out the dispute resolution requirements by type of financial firm. 
Table 1: Legislative dispute resolution requirements by firm type 
Firm type Description Dispute resolution requirements 
Australian 
financial 
services (AFS) 
licensees 
An AFS licensee is a business carrying 
out financial services. This includes 
businesses that:  
 provide financial product advice to 
clients; 
 deal in a financial product; 
 make a market for a financial product; 
 operate a registered scheme; 
 provide a custodial or depository 
service; or 
 provide traditional trustee company 
services (traditional services). 
AFS licensees must have a dispute resolution 
system that consists of: 
 an IDR procedure that complies with the 
standards and requirements made or 
approved by ASIC (set out in this guide) that 
cover complaints made by retail clients in 
relation to the financial services provided; and 
 membership of AFCA. 
AFS licensees must also comply with their IDR 
procedure. 
Note: See s912A(1)(g) of the Corporations Act. 
Unlicensed 
product issuers 
and unlicensed 
secondary 
sellers 
An unlicensed product issuer is an 
issuer of a financial product who is not 
an AFS licensee. 
An unlicensed secondary seller is a 
person who offers the secondary sale 
of a financial product under 
s1012C(5)(b) or (8) of the Corporations 
Act and who is not an AFS licensee. 
Unlicensed product issuers and unlicensed 
secondary sellers are required to have a dispute 
resolution system that consists of: 
 an IDR procedure that complies with the 
standards and requirements made or 
approved by ASIC (set out in this guide) that 
cover complaints made by retail clients in 
relation to the financial services provided; and 
 membership of AFCA. 
Unlicensed product issuers and unlicensed 
secondary sellers must also comply with their 
IDR processes. 
Note: See s1017G(2) of the Corporations Act.

--- PAGE 6 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 6 
Firm type Description Dispute resolution requirements 
Superannuation 
trustees 
A trustee of a regulated superannuation 
fund (other than a self-managed 
superannuation fund (SMSF)), trustee 
of an approved deposit fund or a 
retirement savings account (RSA) 
provider. 
Superannuation trustees must: 
 be a member of AFCA; and 
 have an IDR procedure that complies with the 
standards and requirements set out in 
s912A(2)(a)(i) of the Corporations Act. 
Note 1: See also s101(1)(a)–(c) of the SIS Act. 
Note 2: However, s101(1)(a)–(c) of the SIS Act does 
not apply to a trustee if the trustee is required under the 
Corporations Act to have a dispute resolution system 
complying with s912A(2) or 1017G(2) of the Act. 
Australian credit 
licensees (credit 
licensees) 
Credit providers and lessors, including 
those who are assigned the contractual 
rights of a credit provider or lessor 
(which can include debt collectors who 
purchase a debt from a credit provider 
or lessor). 
Credit service providers (such as 
brokers and other intermediaries), and 
other (such as debt collectors) who act 
on behalf of the credit provider or 
lessor. 
Credit licensees are required to have a dispute 
resolution system that consists of: 
 an IDR procedure that complies with the 
standards and requirements made or 
approved by ASIC (set out in this guide) that 
cover disputes relating to credit activities they 
and their representatives engage in; and 
 membership of AFCA. 
Credit licensees must also comply with their IDR 
procedures. 
Note: See s47 of the National Credit Act. 
Credit 
representatives 
A credit representative is a person 
authorised to engage in specified credit 
activities on behalf of a credit licensee 
under s64(2) or 65(2) of the National 
Credit Act. The employees and 
directors of a credit licensee do not 
need to be formally authorised—they 
act as representatives of the credit 
licensee without a specific 
authorisation. A person can also be 
authorised as a credit representative by 
more than one credit licensee. 
Credit representatives do not need to have IDR 
processes that meet the standards and 
requirements made or approved by ASIC. This 
is because a credit licensee’s IDR process must 
cover disputes relating to its credit representatives. 
Most credit representatives are required to be 
separate members of AFCA: see s64 and 65 of 
the National Credit Act. 
However, a person who has been sub-
authorised under s65(1) of the National Credit 
Act and is an employee or director of the body 
corporate that gave the sub-authorisation does 
not need to be a separate member of AFCA. 
Note: See reg 16 of the National Credit Regulations.

--- PAGE 7 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 7 
Firm type Description Dispute resolution requirements 
Unlicensed COI 
lenders 
(including 
prescribed 
unlicensed COI 
lenders) 
A ‘carried over instrument’ is a contract 
or other instrument that was made and 
in force, and to which an old Credit 
Code applied immediately before 1 July 
2010 (see s4(1) of the National 
Consumer Credit Protection 
(Transitional and Consequential 
Provisions) Act 2009). 
Unlicensed COI lenders are credit 
providers or lessors who only have a 
closed pool of carried over instruments 
and have chosen not to obtain a credit 
licence (or to restrict their activities to 
their carried over instruments, and 
subsequently cancel their credit 
licence). 
Note: A ‘prescribed unlicensed COI 
lender’ is an unlicensed COI lender who 
fails to meet certain probity requirements 
and who has restrictions placed on their 
conduct in relation to their carried over 
instruments. A prescribed unlicensed COI 
lender must not engage in credit activities 
with respect to their carried over 
instruments (other than the activities 
engaged in solely by being the credit 
provider or lessor). They must instead 
appoint a credit licensee to act as a 
‘representative’ to engage in credit 
activities on their behalf with respect to 
their carried over instruments.  
Unlicensed COI lenders (including prescribed 
unlicensed COI lenders): 
 must have an IDR procedure that complies 
with the standards and requirements made or 
approved by ASIC (set out in this guide) that 
cover complaints in relation to the credit 
activities they engage in with respect to their 
carried over instruments; and 
 may choose to join AFCA. 
Unlicensed COI lenders must also comply with 
their IDR procedure. 
Note 1: Details of the obligations of unlicensed COI 
lenders are set out in Information Sheet 110 
Lenders with carried over instruments (INFO 110), 
Regulatory Guide 205 Credit licensing: Credit 
conduct obligations (RG 205), Regulatory 
Guide 206 Credit licensing: Competence and 
training (RG 206) and Regulatory Guide 207 Credit 
licensing: Financial requirements (RG 207). 
Note 2: A prescribed unlicensed COI lender may 
arrange for their credit licensee’s dispute resolution 
system to cover complaints in relation to their 
carried over instruments. However, the prescribed 
unlicensed COI lender remains responsible for 
ensuring that the requirements and standards set 
out in Sections C–D are met. 
Unlicensed COI lenders who choose not to join 
AFCA must keep a register of each of the 
following: 
 complaints relating to their carried over 
instruments; 
 hardship notices made under s72 of the 
National Credit Code (at Sch 1 to the National 
Credit Act); and 
 requests for postponement of enforcement 
proceedings under s94 of the National Credit 
Code. 
Note 1: Unlicensed COI lenders that make 
arrangements for a third-party provider or their 
representative’s dispute resolution system to cover 
complaints relating to their carried over instruments, 
and that are not a member of AFCA, are still 
required to meet these register requirements. 
Note 2: See s47(1A) of the National Credit Act 
(inserted by Sch 2 to the National Credit 
Regulations) for details of the information the 
registers must include.

--- PAGE 8 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 8 
Firm type Description Dispute resolution requirements 
Exempt SPFEs Special purpose funding entities 
(SPFEs) include securitisation entities 
and fundraising special purpose entities 
that make (or buy) loans or leases and 
repackage them as investment 
products to sell to investors. 
Note: See the definition of ‘special 
purpose funding’ entity in s5 of the 
National Credit Act (inserted by Sch 3 to 
the National Credit Regulations). 
SPFEs can either operate under a 
credit licence or as exempt SPFEs: see 
the licensing exemption in regs 23B 
and 23C of the National Credit 
Regulations. 
Note: See the definition of ‘exempt special 
purpose funding entity’ in reg 3 of the 
National Credit Regulations. 
Exempt SPFEs may rely on a licensing 
exemption: see regs 23B and 23C of the 
National Credit Regulations. If they do, they 
must: 
 enter into a servicing agreement with a credit 
licensee under which that licensee acts on 
their behalf; and 
 be a member of AFCA. 
Exempt SPFEs do not have any IDR 
requirements. We expect that the credit 
licensee’s IDR process will cover complaints 
about both: 
 credit activities engaged in by the licensee 
under a servicing agreement; and 
 conduct of the exempt SPFE (including where 
changes are sought to the terms of the 
contract—for example, on the basis of 
hardship or because the contract was 
unsuitable or unjust). 
Credit licensees 
acting on behalf 
of exempt 
SPFEs under a 
servicing 
agreement 
A credit licensee acting on behalf of an 
exempt SPFE, such as a securitisation 
entity that makes (or buys) loans or 
leases and repackages them as 
investment products to sell to investors. 
When performing this role for an exempt SPFE, 
the credit licensee must: 
 notify ASIC when they enter into a servicing 
agreement with an exempt SPFE and provide 
details of its membership with AFCA; and 
 notify ASIC when they cease to be a party to 
the servicing agreement. 
The credit licensee should also ensure that their 
IDR process covers: 
 the exempt SPFE’s activities; and 
 complaints that arise when they act as the 
representative of the exempt SPFE and 
complaints about the conduct of the exempt 
SPFE. 
The credit licensee must inform a complainant of 
their right to complain to AFCA or directly refer 
them to AFCA. 
Financial 
technology 
(fintech) 
businesses 
A financial technology business relying 
on the enhanced regulatory sandbox 
(ERS) exemption provided by 
Corporations (FinTech Sandbox 
Australian Financial Services Licence 
Exemption) Regulations 2020 and 
National Consumer Credit Protection 
(FinTech Sandbox Australian Credit 
Licence Exemption) Regulations 2020. 
Fintech businesses relying on the ERS 
exemption must have a dispute resolution 
system that consists of: 
 an IDR procedure that complies with the 
standards and requirements made or 
approved by ASIC (set out in this guide); and 
 membership of AFCA. 
Note: See Information Sheet 248 Enhanced 
regulatory sandbox (INFO 248) at Table 4.

--- PAGE 9 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 9 
ASIC’s role in internal dispute resolution 
RG 271.5 The objectives of Ch 7 of the Corporations Act are to promote: 
(a) the confident and informed participation of consumers and investors in 
the Australian financial system (also an objective of ASIC under s1 of 
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001); 
(b) fairness, honesty and professionalism by those who provide financial 
services; 
(c) fair, orderly and transparent markets; and 
(d) the reduction of systemic risks. 
Note: See s760A of the Corporations Act 
RG 271.6 Within this framework, we are responsible for overseeing the effective 
operation of the dispute resolution system, which includes setting the standards 
and requirements for financial firms’ IDR processes and oversight of AFCA. 
RG 271.7 We must, when considering whether to make or approve standards or 
requirements relating to IDR, take into account: 
(a) AS/NZS 10002:2014; and 
Note: AS/NZS 10002:2014 is published by SAI Global and available for purchase on 
their website. It is also available through public libraries across Australia. 
(b) any other matter we consider relevant. 
Note: See regs 7.6.02(1)(a) and 7.9.77(1)(a) of the Corporations Regulations 2001 
(Corporations Regulations) and reg 10(1)(a) and item 2.20 of Sch 2 to the National 
Credit Regulations. 
RG 271.8 The standards and requirements set out in ASIC Corporations, Credit and 
Superannuation (Internal Dispute Resolution) Instrument 2020/98 and 
highlighted in this guide are enforceable. Other highlighted requirements in 
this guide reflect existing legal requirements and are also enforceable. 
RG 271.9 The parts of this guide that we have not highlighted or set out in the 
instrument are guidance to help financial firms comply with their legal 
obligations. 
RG 271.10 We may vary or revoke:  
(a) a standard or requirement that we have made for IDR; and 
(b) the operation of a standard or requirement that we have approved in its 
application to IDR. 
Note: See regs 7.6.02(2) and 7.9.77(2) of the Corporations Regulations, and reg 10(2) 
and item 2.20 of Sch 2 to the National Credit Regulations. 
RG 271.11 We have made the requirements in this guide to meet our statutory 
obligations and, in doing so, promote fair consumer outcomes.

--- PAGE 10 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 10 
The importance of IDR 
RG 271.12 Consumer and small business access to fair, timely and effective dispute 
resolution is an essential part of the financial services consumer protection 
framework. It is consistent with ASIC’s function of promoting consumer 
protection in the Australian financial system.  
Note: See s12A(2) of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001. 
RG 271.13 As the first step in the financial dispute resolution framework, IDR provides 
an opportunity for redress to millions of consumers and small businesses 
each year.  
RG 271.14 The Ramsay Review’s Final report: Review of the financial system external 
dispute resolution and complaints framework (Ramsay Review final report) 
stated at p. 189: 
Effective IDR benefits both firms and consumers. IDR is an important 
element of financial firms’ overall relationship with their customers and is 
the primary avenue for aggrieved consumers to seek redress. Pressure on 
[external dispute resolution] is reduced when complaints are resolved 
directly between firms and their customers. 
RG 271.15 We encourage all financial firms to cultivate an organisational culture that 
welcomes feedback and values complaints. A positive complaint 
management culture can produce beneficial outcomes for both consumers 
and firms, including: 
(a) the opportunity to resolve complaints quickly and directly; 
(b) the promotion of trusted relationships between the parties; 
(c) improved levels of consumer confidence and satisfaction; 
(d) greater understanding of the key drivers of complaints;  
(e) the ability to identify emerging issues and inform product and service 
delivery improvements; and 
(f) reduced AFCA and future remediation costs. 
RG 271.16 To develop and maintain a positive complaint management culture, financial 
firms should have a robust IDR process, including all procedures, 
documents, policies, resources, governance and arrangements in place to 
manage complaints.  
RG 271.17 Many firms have addressed the foundational aspects of their IDR process. 
However, we consider more progress can be made in key areas, including: 
(a) achieving organisation-wide understanding of the definition of 
‘complaint’ and the types of matters that must be dealt with in a firm’s 
IDR process; 
(b) increasing the capture, tracking, analysis and reporting of complaint 
data;

--- PAGE 11 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 11 
(c) improving timeliness and efficiency; 
(d) enhancing the quality of written communications and IDR responses; 
(e) strengthening complaint management skills;  
(f) fostering organisation-wide accountability for complaint management; 
and 
(g) leveraging the power of technology and data analytics to improve both 
the IDR process and the products and services offered by financial 
firms. 
Application of the IDR requirements 
RG 271.18 The IDR requirements set out in this guide apply to any expression of 
dissatisfaction made by a consumer that meets the definition of ‘complaint’ 
set out in in AS/NZS 10002:2014: see RG 271.27. 
RG 271.19 We have provided guidance on the types of consumer (including small 
businesses) that financial firms’ IDR processes should cover: see 
RG 271.36–RG 271.44.  
RG 271.20 Financial firms may tailor their IDR process to suit the nature, scale and 
complexity of their business. We have provided guidance on the issues firms 
should consider when tailoring their process at RG 271.23–RG 271.24. 
RG 271.21 Financial firms may also outsource part or all of their IDR process. For 
guidance on the responsibilities that still apply to firms that have outsourced 
their IDR process, see RG 271.45–RG 271.48. 
Requirements for IDR processes 
RG 271.22 This guide sets out: 
(a) the definition of ‘complaint’ set out in AS/NZS 10002:2014 (see 
RG 271.27); 
(b) the minimum content requirements for IDR responses (see RG 271.53–
RG 271.55); 
(c) the maximum IDR timeframes for providing an IDR response (see 
RG 271.56–RG 271.106);  
(d) our requirements for how financial firms’ IDR processes and 
procedures will interact with AFCA (see RG 271.111–RG 271.116); 
(e) the requirements for identifying and escalating systemic issues (see 
Section D); and 
(f) our IDR standards (see Section E).

--- PAGE 12 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 12 
RG 271.23 There are many different kinds of financial firms providing a diverse range 
of financial products and services. We do not take a ‘one size fits all’ 
approach to regulation. What firms need to do to comply with their IDR 
obligations will vary according to the nature, scale and complexity of their 
business. 
RG 271.24 When reviewing or establishing an IDR process, a financial firm should take 
into account: 
(a) the size of their business and the number of people in the organisation; 
(b) the products and services offered and the volume and size of 
transactions the firm is responsible for; 
(c) the nature of their customer base;  
(d) the diversity and structure of their operations (including the extent to 
which the IDR function is outsourced); and 
(e) the likely number and complexity of complaints. 
Transition period 
RG 271.25 We acknowledge that some of the IDR reforms in this guide represent 
change for some financial firms. Firms will need to undertake internal 
capacity building, establish clear lines of reporting and accountability, 
develop processes and systems, and upskill staff who are responsible for 
dealing with complaints. 
RG 271.26 The standards, requirements and guidance in this guide apply to complaints 
received by financial firms on or after 5 October 2021. 
Note: For complaints received by financial firms before 5 October 2021, Regulatory 
Guide 165 Licensing: Internal and external dispute resolution (RG 165) applies. We 
will withdraw RG 165 on 5 October 2022.

--- PAGE 13 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 13 
B Application of IDR requirements 
Key points 
A financial firm must have an IDR process that adopts the definition of 
‘complaint’ set out in AS/NZS 10002:2014. 
Financial firms must deal with expressions of dissatisfaction that meet this 
definition (including complaints made on the firm’s social media platform(s)) 
through their IDR process. The IDR process must meet the IDR 
requirements set out in this guide.  
An IDR process for financial service providers must be able to deal with 
complaints made by ‘retail clients’. We have modified the definition of ‘small 
business’ in s761G of the Corporations Act to align with the broader 
definition of ‘small business’ set out in the AFCA’s Complaint Resolution 
Scheme Rules (AFCA Rules). 
Financial firms may tailor their IDR process to suit the nature, scale and 
complexity of their business. If they outsource part or all of their IDR 
process, the IDR requirements still apply. 
Definition of ‘complaint’ 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.27–RG 271.29 (including note) 
RG 271.27 AS/NZS 10002:2014 sets out the following definition of ‘complaint’ at p. 6: 
[An expression] of dissatisfaction made to or about an organization, related 
to its products, services, staff or the handling of a complaint, where a 
response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected or legally required. 
RG 271.28 A financial firm must deal with expressions of dissatisfaction that satisfy this 
definition under its IDR process, which in turn must meet the requirements 
set out in this guide. 
Note: We interpret the words ‘or about an organization’ in the definition to cover 
expressions of dissatisfaction made on social media in accordance with RG 271.32(a). 
We do not require these words to be read any more broadly than this.  
RG 271.29 AFS licensees’ IDR processes must cover ‘complaints’ against the licensee: 
see s912A of the Corporations Act. Credit licensees’ IDR processes must 
cover ‘disputes in relation to the credit activities engaged in by the licensee’: 
see s47 of the National Credit Act. In this guide, we use ‘complaint’ to mean 
both ‘complaints’ and ‘disputes’ as used in those requirements. Similarly, we 
use the word ‘complainant’ to refer to a person either making a complaint 
against an AFS licensee or raising a dispute about credit activities that are 
engaged in by a credit licensee.

--- PAGE 14 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 14 
RG 271.30 We expect firms to take a proactive approach to identifying complaints. A 
response or resolution is ‘explicitly expected’ if a consumer clearly requests 
it. It is ‘implicitly expected’ if the consumer raises the expression of 
dissatisfaction in a way that implies the consumer reasonably expects the 
firm to respond and/or take specific action. A consumer or small business is 
not required to expressly state the word ‘complaint’ or ‘dispute’, or put their 
complaint in writing, to trigger a financial firm’s obligation to deal with a 
matter according to our IDR requirements. 
 
Note: Our guidance about accessibility of the IDR process, including complaint 
lodgement methods, is set out in RG 271.134–RG 271.140. 
RG 271.31 Financial firms should not categorise an expression of dissatisfaction that 
meets the definition of ‘complaint’ as ‘feedback’, an ‘inquiry’, a ‘comment’ 
or similar (and therefore not to be dealt with in the firm’s IDR process) 
merely because: 
(a) the complainant expresses their dissatisfaction verbally;  
(b) the firm considers that the matter does not have merit; or 
(c) a goodwill payment is made to the complainant to resolve the matter 
without any admission of error. 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.32 (including notes) 
RG 271.32 Under this guide, the following expressions of dissatisfaction are complaints: 
(a) posts (that meet the definition of ‘complaint’ set out in RG 271.27) on a 
social media channel or account owned or controlled by the financial 
firm that is the subject of the post, where the author is both identifiable 
and contactable; 
Note 1: We do not expect financial firms to seek to identify complaints made on third 
party social media accounts or channels. 
Note 2: When responding to a complaint made on social media in accordance with 
RG 271.32(a), a financial firm must ensure consumer privacy is protected. 
Note 3: Representatives of financial firms must refer complaints made on social media 
in accordance with RG 271.32(a) to their licensee, as they are required to do for 
complaints they receive through other channels. 
(b) an objection to a proposed decision about how and to whom to pay a 
superannuation death benefit distribution; 
(c) complaints about a matter that is the subject of an existing remediation 
program or about the remediation program itself (e.g. delays, lack of 
communication); 
(d) complaints about the handling of an insurance claim (e.g. excessive 
delays or unreasonable information requests).

--- PAGE 15 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 15 
What is not a ‘complaint’ 
RG 271.33 For avoidance of doubt, we do not consider the following to be ‘complaints’: 
(a) employment-related complaints raised by financial firm staff;  
(b) comments made about a firm where a response is not expected, such as: 
(i) feedback provided in surveys; or 
(ii) reports intended solely to bring a matter to a financial firm’s 
attention—for example, that an automatic teller machine (ATM) is 
damaged; 
(c) hardship notices or requests to postpone enforcement proceedings, 
unless the customer raises issues that meet the definition of complaint; 
and 
(d) reports of unauthorised transactions under the ePayments Code and 
disputed transactions under a chargeback process. However, we 
consider that a complaint has been made if the consumer raises separate 
issues related to the transaction that meet the definition of a complaint, 
or expresses dissatisfaction with the outcome or handling of the 
unauthorised or disputed transaction. 
Note: The ePayments Code contains special arrangements for dealing with reports of 
unauthorised transactions. 
RG 271.34 Financial firms structure and resource their complaint management 
function(s) differently. Smaller firms may have one person responsible for 
complaints, along with other duties. Medium-sized and large firms may 
empower their frontline staff to resolve complaints at the first point of 
contact, and also provide further opportunities for matters to be considered 
by a specialist complaints team if complainants are not satisfied with the 
initial action taken. Some firms, especially in the banking sector, also offer 
customer advocates as an additional escalation point. 
RG 271.35 Regardless of a firm’s structure, it is the complainant’s expression of 
dissatisfaction (that meets the definition of ‘complaint’ in RG 271.27) that 
triggers a firm’s obligation to deal with the matter according to our IDR 
requirements, not the referral of a complaint to a specialist complaints or 
IDR team.

--- PAGE 16 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 16 
Definition of ‘complainant’ 
Small business complaints 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.36 
RG 271.36 Any IDR process for financial service providers must be able to deal, at a 
minimum, with complaints made by ‘retail clients’, as defined by s761G of 
the Corporations Act and its related regulations.  
RG 271.37 The AFCA Rules define ‘small business’ as a business that had less than 
100 employees at the time of the act or omission by the financial firm that 
gave rise to the complaint: see Section E.1 of the AFCA Rules. A small 
business includes a primary producer, if that primary producer is also a small 
business.  
Note 1: The AFCA Rules define a primary producer as a primary production business 
within the meaning of s995.1(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997. 
Note 2: The AFCA Rules exclude from AFCA’s jurisdiction a complaint where a 
complainant is a member of a group of related bodies corporate and that group has 
100 employees or more. 
RG 271.38 We have modified (for IDR purposes only) the definition of ‘small business’ 
in s761G of the Corporations Act to align it with the broader definition in the 
AFCA Rules. This guarantees consistent dispute resolution access for small 
business complainants through both IDR and external dispute resolution (EDR). 
Traditional trustee complaints 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.39 (including note) 
RG 271.39 The IDR process for trustee companies providing traditional services 
(traditional trustees) must be able to deal with complaints made by retail 
clients. For traditional services, these specifically include individuals and 
small businesses who:  
(a) directly engage a trustee company to provide traditional services (e.g. to 
prepare a will, trust instrument, power of attorney or agency 
arrangement); and 
(b) do not directly engage the services of the trustee company, but who may 
request an information return. These persons include: 
(i) beneficiaries (including beneficiaries named in a deceased’s will, 
people who have an interest in the estate of someone who has died 
without a will, and people who have commenced legal proceedings 
to be included as a beneficiary of a deceased’s estate); and

--- PAGE 17 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 17 
(ii) certain other persons involved in charitable and other trusts 
(e.g. the settlor of a trust, or a person who has the power to appoint 
or remove a trustee or vary any of the terms of the trust). 
Note: See s601RAB(3) and 761G of the Corporations Act, and regs 7.1.28A and 
5D.2.01 of the Corporations Regulations. 
RG 271.40 An ‘information return’ needs to include certain information about the trust, 
including information about income earned on the trust’s assets, expenses 
and the net value of the trust’s assets: see s601RAC(1)(e) of the Corporations 
Act and regs 5D.2.01, 5D.2.02 and 7.1.28A of the Corporations Regulations. 
Superannuation-related complaints 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.41–RG 271.42 
RG 271.41 There are specific requirements for IDR processes for regulated 
superannuation funds (except for SMSFs), approved deposit funds and RSA 
providers. At a minimum, their IDR process must be able to deal with 
complaints made by a superannuation fund member or third-party 
beneficiary who is: 
(a) eligible to make a complaint to AFCA under s1053 of the Corporations 
Act; or  
(b) taken to be a member of a regulated superannuation fund or approved 
deposit fund, or a holder of an RSA, under s1053A of the Corporations 
Act. 
RG 271.42 This means that the IDR process must accept and deal with complaints made 
by: 
(a) superannuation product holders: 
(i) members or former members of a regulated superannuation fund 
(but not an SMSF); 
(ii) beneficiaries or former beneficiaries of an approved deposit fund; 
(iii) people with an interest in a superannuation annuity policy issued 
by a life company; 
(iv) holders or former holders of an RSA; and 
(v) people with an interest in an insurance contract where the 
premiums are paid from an RSA; 
(b) beneficiaries with an interest in a death benefit; and 
(c) parties (and intending parties) to an agreement under the Family Law 
Act 1975 or order affecting superannuation, including: 
(i) a member, beneficiary or RSA holder’s spouse or former spouse 
who is party to an agreement, or subject to an order about that 
person’s superannuation interest; and

--- PAGE 18 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 18 
(ii) someone eligible to request information about that superannuation 
interest. 
Credit-related complaints 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.43 
RG 271.43 At a minimum, an IDR process for credit must be able to handle complaints 
made about the credit activities engaged in by the credit licensee or its credit 
representatives, or an unlicensed COI lender: s47(1)(h) of the National 
Credit Act and Sch 2 to the National Credit Regulations. This will involve 
covering complaints made by consumers of credit, lessees and guarantors as 
defined under the National Credit Act. 
RG 271.44 We encourage firms to develop IDR processes that have broader coverage 
than outlined at RG 271.43, and that are consistent with the nature of their 
business and their dealings with consumers and investors. In particular, we 
encourage all credit licensees to deal with complaints from small 
businesses—as defined in the AFCA Rules—under their IDR processes. 
Outsourcing IDR processes 
RG 271.45 Some financial firms outsource part, or all, of their IDR process. 
Outsourcing might be to external parties or to other entities within a related 
corporate group. 
RG 271.46 A financial firm that outsources part, or all, of its IDR process remains 
responsible for ensuring that the service provider’s IDR processes comply 
with all the requirements in this regulatory guide.  
RG 271.47 Outsourcing should also be done in a way that ensures accessibility for 
consumers and maintains a consumer-centric approach. 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.48 
RG 271.48 Firms that outsource part, or all, of their IDR process must: 
(a) have measures in place to ensure that due skill and care is taken in 
choosing suitable service providers; 
(b) monitor the ongoing performance of service providers; and 
(c) appropriately deal with any actions by service providers that breach 
service level agreements or fall short of their obligations under this 
regulatory guide.

--- PAGE 19 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 19 
C Maximum IDR timeframes and IDR responses 
Key points 
This section sets out: 
• when financial firms should acknowledge a complaint;  
• what financial firms must include in an IDR response;  
• the maximum timeframes that financial firms have to provide an IDR 
response; and 
• when a financial firm does not have to provide an IDR response within 
the maximum IDR timeframe. 
We also set out our expectations about how firms’ IDR processes will 
interact with AFCA. 
RG 271.49 Timeliness is central to effective complaint management and is a key 
performance measure of a firm’s IDR process. Findings from ASIC’s 
research into the consumer experience of the IDR journey indicate that 
delays and frictions in the IDR process can create real barriers for consumers 
and damage the consumer–firm relationship. 
Note: See Report 603 The consumer journey through the Internal Dispute Resolution 
process of financial service providers (REP 603). 
RG 271.50 Important measures of timeliness include the length taken to acknowledge a 
complaint and to provide the complainant with an IDR response.  
Acknowledgement of complaint 
RG 271.51 A financial firm should acknowledge receipt of each complaint promptly. 
We expect that firms will acknowledge the complaint within 24 hours (or 
one business day) of receiving it, or as soon as practicable. 
RG 271.52 Financial firms may acknowledge a complaint verbally or in writing (email, 
post or social media channels). When determining the appropriate method of 
communication, we expect firms to take into account the method used by the 
complainant to lodge their complaint and any preferences they may have 
expressed about communication methods.

--- PAGE 20 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 20 
What an IDR response must contain  
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.53–RG 271.54 (including notes) 
RG 271.53 An ‘IDR response’ is a written communication from a financial firm to the 
complainant, informing them of: 
(a) the final outcome of their complaint at IDR (either confirmation of 
actions taken by the firm to fully resolve the complaint or reasons for 
rejection or partial rejection of the complaint); 
(b) their right to take the complaint to AFCA if they are not satisfied with 
the IDR response; and 
(c) the contact details for AFCA. 
Note 1: In order to give an IDR response, unlicensed COI lenders who have not joined 
AFCA must inform the complainant of the final outcome of their complaint at IDR 
within 30 calendar days. 
Note 2: If the complaint relates to a superannuation death benefit distribution, the death 
benefit decision-maker must also give the complainant information about the 
28 calendar day time limit (under s1056 of the Corporations Act) for lodging a 
complaint with AFCA (see RG 271.84(a)). This time limit must be included in a death 
benefit decision-maker’s notice. 
Note 3: If a complaint has been referred to IDR by AFCA, the financial firm may draft 
the IDR response to reflect the fact that the customer has already initiated contact with 
AFCA. 
RG 271.54 If a financial firm rejects or partially rejects the complaint, the IDR response 
must clearly set out the reasons for the decision by: 
(a) identifying and addressing the issues raised in the complaint; 
(b) setting out the financial firm’s findings on material questions of fact and 
referring to the information that supports those findings; and 
(c) providing enough detail for the complainant to understand the basis of 
the decision and to be fully informed when deciding whether to escalate 
the matter to AFCA or another forum. 
RG 271.55 The level of detail in an IDR response should reflect the complexity of the 
complaint and the nature and extent of any investigation conducted by the 
firm. We do not expect financial firms to provide information in an IDR 
response that would breach the firm’s privacy or other legislative obligations 
(e.g. the ‘tipping off’ provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-
Terrorism Financing Act 2006).

--- PAGE 21 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 21 
Maximum timeframes for an IDR response  
When an IDR response must be provided by 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.56–RG 271.60 and Table 2 
(including note) 
RG 271.56 A financial firm must provide an IDR response to a complainant no later 
than 30 calendar days after receiving the complaint. However, in some cases 
a different timeframe applies: see RG 271.58. There are also exceptions: see 
RG 271.64–RG 271.66. 
Note: Section 36 (Calculating time) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 is to be applied 
in construing the timeframes in RG 271. The timeframes begin on the day that the 
complaint is received, regardless of whether the day of receipt is a business day. As per 
s36, the timeframes do not include the day of receipt. ‘Day 1’ is therefore the first 
calendar or business day (depending on the paragraph of RG 271) after the financial 
firm has received the complaint. 
RG 271.57 Superannuation trustees and RSA providers satisfy the requirement to 
provide written reasons for a decision (see s101(1)(d) of the SIS Act and 
s47(1)(d) of the RSA Act) when they provide an IDR response. 
RG 271.58 Table 2 summarises the maximum IDR timeframes for all complaints. 
RG 271.59 Different timeframes apply to: 
(a) complaints about a traditional trustee (see RG 271.76–RG 271.78); 
(b) complaints about superannuation trustees (see RG 271.79);  
(c) complaints about superannuation death benefit distributions (see 
RG 271.80–RG 271.85); and 
(d) certain types of credit complaints (see RG 271.86–RG 271.101). 
RG 271.60 There are also different requirements for complaints closed within five 
business days of receipt: see RG 271.71–RG 271.75. 
Table 2: Maximum IDR timeframes for financial firms to provide an IDR response  
Complaint type Maximum timeframes for IDR response  More information 
Standard complaints No later than 30 calendar days after receiving the complaint. RG 271.56 
Traditional trustee 
complaints 
No later than 45 calendar days after receiving the complaint. RG 271.76–
RG 271.78 
Superannuation trustee 
complaints, except for 
complaints about death 
benefit distributions 
No later than 45 calendar days after receiving the complaint. RG 271.79

--- PAGE 22 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 22 
Complaint type Maximum timeframes for IDR response  More information 
Complaints about 
superannuation death 
benefit distributions 
No later than 90 calendar days after the expiry of the 28 
calendar day period for objecting to a proposed death benefit 
distribution referred to in s1056(2)(a) of the Corporations Act. 
RG 271.80–
RG 271.85 
Credit-related complaints 
involving default notices 
No later than 21 calendar days after receiving the complaint. RG 271.86 and 
RG 271.91 
Credit-related complaints 
involving hardship 
notices or requests to 
postpone enforcement 
proceedings 
No later than 21 calendar days after receiving the complaint. 
Exceptions apply if the credit provider or lessor does not 
have sufficient information to make a decision, or if they 
reach an agreement with the complainant.  
Insufficient information 
If the credit provider or lessor does not have sufficient 
information about a hardship notice to make a decision, they 
must request the information no later than 21 calendar days 
after receiving the complaint. The complainant must provide 
the information within 21 calendar days of receiving the 
request. 
Once the credit provider or lessor has received the requested 
information, the credit provider has a further 21 calendar 
days to provide an IDR response. 
If the credit provider or lessor does not receive the requested 
information within 21 calendar days of requesting the 
information, the credit provider or lessor has 7 calendar days 
to provide an IDR response. 
Agreement reached 
If agreement is reached about a hardship notice or request to 
postpone enforcement proceedings, the credit provider or 
lessor has 30 calendar days to confirm the terms or 
conditions in writing.  
RG 271.92–
RG 271.93  
RG 271.61 We consider that an objection to a proposed decision about how and to 
whom to pay a superannuation death benefit distribution is a complaint. For 
details on how the maximum IDR timeframe applies to death benefit 
distribution complaints, see RG 271.80–RG 271.85. 
RG 271.62 Where a complaint about unauthorised transactions is covered by card 
scheme rules, the timeframes for providing a response set out in the scheme 
rules will apply. 
Complaint management delays 
RG 271.63 There are many variables that can affect complaint response times. This 
includes the complexity of the issues raised and the availability of 
information, including from third parties. However, we consider that the 
pursuit of best practice should result in firms regularly meeting or 
outperforming the maximum IDR timeframes.

--- PAGE 23 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 23 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.64–RG 271.66 (including notes) 
RG 271.64 A financial firm is not required to provide a complainant with an IDR 
response within the relevant maximum IDR timeframe if certain 
circumstances exist: see RG 271.65–RG 271.66. 
RG 271.65 First, there must be no reasonable opportunity for the financial firm to provide 
the IDR response within the relevant maximum IDR timeframe because: 
(a) resolution of the individual complaint is particularly complex (see 
RG 271.67 for examples of ‘complexity’); and/or 
(b) circumstances beyond the financial firm’s control are causing complaint 
management delays (see RG 271.68 for examples of such circumstances). 
RG 271.66 Second, before the relevant maximum IDR timeframe expires, the financial 
firm must give the complainant an ‘IDR delay notification’ that informs the 
complainant about: 
(a) the reasons for the delay; 
(b) their right to complain to AFCA if they are dissatisfied; and 
(c) the contact details for AFCA. 
Note 1: We consider that objections to proposed decisions about how and to whom to 
pay a superannuation death benefit distribution are complaints. AFCA cannot consider a 
complaint about a death benefit distribution unless the complainant has first lodged a 
complaint about that decision with the death benefit decision-maker and received a 
response to the complaint. If the death benefit decision-maker delays providing a 
complainant with an IDR response and the complainant escalates the matter to AFCA, 
AFCA cannot consider the complaint as it relates to the distribution of the death benefit 
but can consider the delay. This restriction to AFCA’s jurisdiction should be reflected in 
any IDR delay notification a death benefit decision-maker provides in response to a 
death benefit distribution complaint.  
Note 2: The exceptions set out at RG 271.64–RG 271.66 do not prevent a complainant 
from exercising their right to escalate a complaint to AFCA and do not affect AFCA’s 
ability to register a complaint. 
Note 3: The exceptions do not apply to the refer back timeframes applied by AFCA 
when a complaint is escalated to AFCA.  
Note 4: If a complaint has been referred to IDR by AFCA, the financial firm may draft 
the IDR delay notification to reflect the fact that the customer has already initiated 
contact with AFCA.  
RG 271.67 Examples of ‘complexity’ include when: 
(a) an individual complaint is about a transaction or event that occurred 
more than six years ago and requires reconstruction of account 
information; and 
(b) a complaint about a superannuation death benefit distribution involves 
multiple submissions from potential beneficiaries with competing 
information about the status of relationships or levels of financial 
dependence.

--- PAGE 24 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 24 
RG 271.68 Examples of circumstances that may be beyond a financial firm’s control 
include when: 
(a) the complainant is waiting on a medical appointment that the firm 
reasonably requires the complainant to attend; 
(b) the complainant is unable to respond to the financial firm due to illness 
or absence;  
(c) information must be obtained from third parties to a complaint 
(excluding an authorised representative who is a party to the complaint); 
and 
(d) a death benefit decision-maker is waiting on information requested from 
potential beneficiaries to a death benefit to substantiate their claim.  
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.69 
RG 271.69 Superannuation trustees and RSA providers satisfy the requirement to 
provide written reasons for the failure by a trustee to make a decision on a 
complaint (see s101(1)(d) of the SIS Act and s47(1)(d) of the RSA Act) 
when they provide an IDR delay notification. 
RG 271.70 Unlicensed COI lenders who have not joined AFCA need to inform the 
complainant of the reasons for the delay before the end of the 30 calendar 
day period. 
Complaints closed within five business days of receipt 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.71 
RG 271.71 A financial firm does not need to provide an IDR response to a complainant 
if the firm closes the complaint by the end of the fifth business day after 
receipt because the firm has: 
(a) resolved the complaint to the complainant’s satisfaction (see RG 271.73); 
or 
(b) given the complainant an explanation and/or apology when the firm can 
take no further action to reasonably address the complaint (see RG 271.74). 
RG 271.72 However, an exception may apply: see RG 271.75. 
RG 271.73 When determining whether a complaint has been resolved to a complainant’s 
satisfaction, we expect firms to consider whether: 
(a) the complainant has confirmed (verbally or in writing) that they are 
satisfied with the action(s) taken by the financial firm in response to the 
complaint and do not wish to take the matter further; or  
(b) other circumstances exist that make it reasonable for the firm to form 
the view that the complaint has been resolved to the complainant’s 
satisfaction.

--- PAGE 25 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 25 
RG 271.74 In some circumstances, it may be reasonable for a financial firm to form the 
view that an explanation and/or apology is the only action they can take to 
address the complaint. For example, if the complaint relates only to: 
(a) a financial firm’s commercial decision, such as a refusal to grant credit 
or provide insurance cover on certain terms; or 
(b) reasonable initial contact by a financial firm about debt collection. 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.75 
RG 271.75 A financial firm must provide a written IDR response, even where the 
complaint is closed by the end of the fifth business day: 
(a) if the complainant requests a written response;  
(b) if the complaint is about: 
(i) hardship;  
(ii) a declined insurance claim; or 
(iii) the value of an insurance claim; or  
(c) for any decision of a trustee (or failure by the trustee to make a 
decision) relating to a complaint. A trustee in this paragraph means a 
trustee of a regulated superannuation fund other than an SMSF, or of an 
approved deposit fund (see s101(1)(d) of the SIS Act). 
Note: Section 101(1)(d) of the SIS Act does not provide an exception from providing 
written reasons because a complaint is resolved promptly. Not all complaints resolved 
by a trustee will involve a decision of a trustee (or failure by a trustee to make a 
decision) relating to the complaint. In some cases where a complaint is resolved 
promptly, all the trustee may be providing is an explanation or an apology, rather than 
making a decision relating to the complaint within the meaning of s101(1)(d). For 
example, if the complaint is about:  
• the general administration or a policy of the fund (and the complainant is not 
seeking to argue for changes in their own case); and 
• the operation of statutory conditions of release and service delays that have not 
caused the complainant loss.  
The trustee must determine what is an appropriate response based on the context and 
facts of each complaint. If the response to the complaint requires some consideration of 
the complainant’s individual circumstances or the complainant has requested a 
particular resolution, then it is more likely that in responding to the complaint the 
trustee will have made a decision (or will have implicitly failed to make a decision), 
which will require written reasons. For complaints that are not closed by the end of the 
fifth business day, trustees must provide a written IDR response regardless of whether 
there was any decision of the trustee (or failure by the trustee to make a decision) 
relating to a complaint.

--- PAGE 26 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 26 
More information on maximum timeframes for traditional 
trustee complaints 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.76–RG 271.78 
RG 271.76 During the 45 calendar day maximum IDR timeframe, a traditional trustee 
must: 
(a) on receiving the complaint, use their best endeavours to identify and 
notify other people who may request an information return (i.e. other 
beneficiaries) and who may reasonably have an interest in the outcome 
of the complaint. We encourage traditional trustees to do this as quickly 
as possible; 
(b) where relevant to the efficient and fair handling of the complaint at 
IDR, consider the views of those identified at RG 271.76(a); and 
(c) keep those identified at RG 271.76(a) informed of the progress of the 
complaint at key stages of the IDR process, including when the trustee 
gives an IDR response or IDR delay notification. 
RG 271.77 Under the 45 calendar day maximum IDR timeframe, time stops running 
when: 
(a) another person commences legal proceedings to be included as a 
beneficiary and the outcome would affect the handling of the complaint 
at IDR; or 
(b) the traditional trustee applies for an opinion, advice or direction from a 
court to reasonably handle the complaint at IDR (e.g. where the trustee 
company is acting as a manager or administrator of the trust property). 
RG 271.78 Time starts to run again once the court determines whether the other person 
should be included as a beneficiary, or provides an opinion, advice or otherwise 
gives a direction, and the time to lodge an appeal (if relevant) has passed. 
More information on maximum timeframes for 
superannuation trustee complaints 
Insurance in superannuation complaints 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.79 
RG 271.79 A complainant may lodge a complaint about insurance in superannuation 
with the insurer or the trustee. Trustees, insurers and administrators must 
have arrangements in place to ensure the maximum IDR timeframe is 
complied with regardless of the initial lodgement point. Time starts to run 
from the date the complaint is first lodged with either one of the parties.

--- PAGE 27 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 27 
Objections to superannuation death benefit distributions  
RG 271.80 A death benefit decision-maker may, when distributing a death benefit, go 
through an initial information-gathering process and then propose a decision 
on how and to whom to pay the benefit: see s1056 of the Corporations Act. 
Notice of the proposal is sent to all potential beneficiaries, explaining that 
they may object to the proposal within 28 calendar days of receiving it: see 
s1056(2)(a). 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.81–RG 271.85 (including notes) 
RG 271.81 Any objection to a proposed death benefit distribution is a complaint and 
will trigger the start of the IDR process. 
RG 271.82 When an objection is made, the 90 calendar day maximum IDR timeframe 
begins from the end of the 28 calendar day objection period. 
RG 271.83 After reviewing any objections, the death benefit decision-maker may either: 
(a) amend the previous proposed decision and give all potential 
beneficiaries additional notice that the decision-maker proposes to make 
a new decision (and further objections must be notified to the death 
benefit decision-maker within 28 calendar days); or 
(b) maintain the previous proposed decision and give all potential 
beneficiaries notice that they have made the decision (and eligible 
complainants can make a complaint to AFCA within 28 calendar days). 
RG 271.84 When the death benefit decision-maker gives notice of a new proposed 
decision in response to an objection (as set out in RG 271.83(a), they must: 
(a) provide each complainant with a response that meets the minimum IDR 
response requirements set out in RG 271.53–RG 271.54, except for the 
AFCA-related requirements at RG 271.53(b)–RG 271.53(c). This is 
because any objection must be made to the death benefit decision-
maker, rather than to AFCA; and 
(b) provide any non-complaining beneficiaries with the same information 
as the complainant, while complying with any obligations under privacy 
laws; 
Note: When the death benefit decision-maker provides further proposed decisions, the 
maximum 90 calendar day timeframe will apply from the end of each 28 calendar day 
objection period. This will continue with each new proposed decision until the death 
benefit decision-maker makes the decision. 
RG 271.85 When the death benefit decision-maker gives notice that they have made the 
decision, they must: 
(a) provide each complainant with a response that meets the minimum IDR 
response requirements set out in RG 271.53–RG 271.54, including

--- PAGE 28 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 28 
information about the complainant’s right to refer the matter to AFCA 
within 28 calendar days of being given notice if they are not satisfied; and 
(b) provide any non-complaining beneficiaries with the same information as 
the complainant, while complying with any obligations under privacy laws. 
Note 1: Notice under RG 271.85(a) is ‘given’ when it is received by the intended 
recipient. The 28 calendar day period will begin from that date. The day a notice is 
‘given’ may, therefore, be later than the actual date of the notice. 
Note 2: Generally, AFCA cannot consider a complaint about a death benefit distribution 
unless the complainant has lodged an objection with the death benefit decision-maker 
and received a response to the complaint. The complainant must lodge their objection 
within 28 calendar days of being given notice of the proposed decision.  
More information on maximum timeframes for certain 
credit complaints 
Complaints involving default notices 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.86 (including note) 
RG 271.86 If a complaint involves a default notice, the credit provider or lessor must 
provide an IDR response to the complainant within 21 calendar days.  
Note: An exemption applies for complaints about hardship notices or requests to 
postpone enforcement proceedings that the complainant has previously sought and the 
provider or lessor has rejected or not responded to. Given the urgency of these cases, the 
complainant may take their complaint directly to AFCA once the timeframes in the 
National Credit Code have passed—for more information, see RG 271.92–RG 271.101. 
RG 271.87 A credit provider or lessor must give a borrower a ‘default notice’ before 
commencing enforcement proceedings to recover money, take possession of 
property or sell property: see s88 of the National Credit Code. The default 
notice must:  
(a) inform the borrower or lessee that they must remedy the default within 
30 calendar days; and  
(b) substantially meet the pro forma notice requirements in Form 12A and 
Form 18A of the National Credit Regulations. 
Note: See s208 of National Credit Code and regs 6, 86, 105K and Forms 12, 12A and 
18A of the National Credit Regulations, as amended by the National Consumer Credit 
Protection Amendment Regulation 2013 (No. 1). 
RG 271.88 A complaint may involve a default notice if, for example, the complainant: 
(a) alleges that the default notice was not served; 
(b) disputes the amount specified in the default notice or whether the 
default notice was rectified; or 
(c) has a dispute about the lender’s communications leading up to the issue 
of the default notice.

--- PAGE 29 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 29 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.89 
RG 271.89 Credit providers (including debt collectors), credit service providers, their 
credit representatives and unlicensed COI lenders must refrain from 
commencing or continuing with legal proceedings or any other enforcement 
action (i.e. debt collection activity) against the complainant. Unless the 
statute of limitations is about to expire, this applies: 
(a) while the complaint is being handled at IDR (during the 21 calendar 
days); and  
(b) for a reasonable time thereafter. 
Note: We also expect financial firms to comply with RG 271.89 while they are 
considering a hardship notice or request to postpone enforcement proceedings. 
RG 271.90 This will enable the complaint to be genuinely dealt with at IDR. The 
‘reasonable time thereafter’ will also allow the complainant the opportunity 
to lodge their complaint with AFCA if the complaint cannot be resolved at IDR. 
RG 271.91 We expect that a sufficient timeframe for a complainant to lodge a complaint 
with AFCA will be at least 14 calendar days after receiving the IDR 
response. This may be longer, depending on the particular circumstances of 
the complaint (e.g. if the complainant needs more time to lodge a dispute 
with AFCA because of accessibility issues).  
Credit complaints involving hardship notices or requests to postpone 
enforcement proceedings 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.92–RG 271.93 
RG 271.92 Credit providers, credit service providers, lessors and unlicensed COI 
lenders must treat complaints involving hardship notices or requests to 
postpone enforcement proceedings as urgent matters. 
RG 271.93 Where a complaint involves a hardship notice or request to postpone 
enforcement proceedings, the following maximum IDR timeframes apply: 
(a) the credit provider or lessor has 21 calendar days to consider and 
determine whether to agree to:  
(i) a change in the terms of the credit contract or lease for hardship 
(under s72 and 177B of the National Credit Code); or  
(ii) the request to postpone enforcement proceedings (under s94 and 
179H of the National Credit Code); or 
(b) if the credit provider or lessor requires further information about a 
hardship notice, they have the additional time allowed for credit 
contracts or leases entered into on or after 1 March 2013 (under s72 and 
177B of the National Credit Code). This is up to:  
(i) 28 calendar days from the date the information is requested, but not 
received; or

--- PAGE 30 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 30 
(ii) 21 calendar days from when they consider they have received the 
information requested. 
Note: See Information Sheet 105 FAQs—Dealing with consumers and credit 
(INFO 105) for more information on timeframes for responding to a hardship notice 
when further information is required.  
RG 271.94 If the complaint is not resolved within these timeframes, there will be no 
further time at IDR to deal with the complaint (unless RG 271.98 applies) 
and the complainant should be referred to AFCA. 
RG 271.95 A borrower or guarantor may give a credit provider a hardship notice or 
request the postponement of enforcement proceedings. A lessee may also 
give a hardship notice or request the postponement of enforcement 
proceedings for leases entered into on or after 1 March 2013. 
RG 271.96 Credit providers and lessors should have a dedicated telephone number and, 
where possible, a fax number, postal address and email address to accept and 
deal with hardship notices. 
RG 271.97 We expect that credit providers, credit service providers, lessors and unlicensed 
COI lenders will have systems in place to easily identify a complaint involving 
a hardship notice or a request to postpone enforcement proceedings. 
RG 271.98 We confirm in RG 267 that the AFCA Rules may allow AFCA a discretion 
to vary timeframes that apply to complaints that are referred back to 
financial firms for consideration. This may include complaints when no 
agreement is reached within the maximum IDR timeframes for complaints 
about hardship notices or requests to postpone enforcement proceedings.  
Note: See RG 267.187–RG 267.197 for more information about ‘refer back 
arrangements’. 
RG 271.99 If a borrower and the credit provider or lessor have reached an agreement 
about a hardship notice or postponement of enforcement proceedings, the 
credit provider or lessor has a further 30 calendar days to confirm in writing:  
(a) the terms of change to the credit contract or lease (see s73 or 177C of 
the National Credit Code); or  
(b) the conditions of postponement of enforcement proceedings (see s95 or 
179J of the National Credit Code).  
Note: Transitional arrangements apply to RG 271.99(a). When an agreement is a 
‘simple arrangement’, credit providers and lessors are exempt from having to confirm in 
writing the particulars of a change to the terms of the credit contract or lease: see Class 
Order [CO 14/41] Extension of transitional credit hardship provisions. A simple 
arrangement is an agreement that defers or reduces the obligations of a debtor or lessee 
for no more than 90 calendar days. This exemption applies until 1 March 2022. Despite 
the exemption from giving written notice, the maximum timeframes summarised in 
Table 2 will apply. Credit providers and lessors must advise the debtor or lessee of the 
changes made to the terms within 30 calendar days of the agreement.

--- PAGE 31 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 31 
RG 271.100 The credit provider must inform the complainant of their right to complain to 
AFCA and provide AFCA’s contact details at certain points during the 
process of dealing with a hardship notice and/or request to postpone 
enforcement proceedings. This information: 
(a) must be provided when the credit provider or lessor advises the 
complainant in writing that the credit provider or lessor has not agreed 
to change the terms of their credit contract or lease, or that the provider 
or lessor does not agree to negotiate a postponement of enforcement 
proceedings (see s72, 94, 177B, and 179H of the National Credit Code); 
and 
(b) should be provided if a change to the contract or lease terms or 
postponement has been agreed to, when the credit provider or lessor 
notifies the complainant in writing of the terms of the variation or 
conditions of the postponement. The credit provider or lessor must send 
this written notice within 30 calendar days of the agreement being 
reached (see s 71, 73, 95, 177A, 177C, and 179J of the National Credit 
Code). 
Note: This requirement does not apply to an unlicensed COI lender who has not joined 
AFCA. 
RG 271.101 We recognise that complaints involving hardship notices or postponement of 
enforcement proceedings may also involve issues relating to default notices. A 
complainant may lodge their complaint directly with AFCA if the complaint 
involves a default notice, issued after a credit provider, credit service provider 
or lessor has not responded to and/or decided not to grant a change to the 
terms of the credit contract or lease for hardship or postponement of enforcement 
proceedings. Where this is the case, RG 271.99–RG 271.100 will apply. 
IDR response requirements for multi-tier IDR processes 
RG 271.102 The maximum IDR timeframes for providing an IDR response (see 
RG 271.56–RG 271.101) apply to all IDR processes, including those that 
include internal appeals or escalation mechanisms (multi-tier IDR processes). 
RG 271.103 Many financial firms operate multi-tier IDR processes. Typically, this might 
include frontline staff or an initial point of contact considering the 
complaint. If they are not able to resolve it: 
(a) an operational area (e.g. claims or underwriting) may review the 
complaint; and/or 
(b) a centralised ‘complaints team’ may conduct a further review and investigation. 
RG 271.104 Financial firms should generally aim to resolve the majority of complaints at 
the first point of contact, within a short timeframe.

--- PAGE 32 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 32 
RG 271.105 Firms may arrange their complaint management resources and processes to 
suit the nature, scale and complexity of their business; however, 
complainants should not be disadvantaged by the use of multi-tier IDR 
processes by financial firms. 
RG 271.106 Regardless of the structure of a firm’s IDR process, the firm’s obligation to 
deal with a matter according to our IDR requirements is triggered when the 
complainant’s expression of dissatisfaction meets the definition of 
‘complaint’ set out in RG 271.27. It is not triggered by the referral of a 
complaint to a specialist complaints or IDR team.  
Note: See RG 271.27–RG 271.32 for our guidance on the definition of ‘complaint’. 
The role of customer advocates  
RG 271.107 Many financial firms have introduced the role of ‘customer advocate’.  
RG 271.108 The Ramsay Review considered the impact of the customer advocate role 
within banks. The Ramsay Review final report made the following finding 
(at p. 195): 
The appointment of Customer Advocates could potentially assist with the 
resolution of disputes, but these positions have only recently been created 
and it is too soon to evaluate their role. Improved IDR data should make it 
easier to assess the impact of Customer Advocates in the future. 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.109–RG 271.110 (including Note 1) 
RG 271.109 A financial firm may offer a complainant the option of escalating their 
complaint to the customer advocate, as an alternative to AFCA, after an IDR 
response is issued. When making such an offer, the firm must not prevent 
complainants from exercising their right to access AFCA—for example, by 
presenting the customer advocate as a mandatory step in the IDR process. 
RG 271.110 If a complainant chooses to escalate their complaint to the customer 
advocate, the total time spent dealing with the complaint must not exceed the 
relevant maximum IDR timeframe set out at Table 2. The total time includes 
both the IDR process and the customer advocate review. 
Note 1: For the purposes of calculating the timeframe referred to in RG 271.110, time 
stops running on the date that the IDR response is sent to the complainant. Time starts 
to run again from the date that the complainant notifies the financial firm that they wish 
to escalate the complaint to the customer advocate. 
Note 2: We have set out further information on the customer advocate’s role in 
improving financial firms’ IDR processes, and our requirements for financial firms in 
relation to customer advocate recommendations, at RG 271.191–RG 271.192.

--- PAGE 33 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 33 
Links between the IDR process and AFCA 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.111–RG 271.112 
RG 271.111 For the financial dispute resolution system to be fully effective, financial 
firms need to establish appropriate links between their IDR process and 
AFCA. A complaint may go through the IDR process but remain unresolved, 
or may not be resolved within the relevant maximum IDR timeframe. In this 
instance, the IDR process must require the firm to: 
(a) inform the complainant that they have a right to pursue their complaint 
with AFCA; and 
(b) provide details about how to access AFCA. 
RG 271.112 The IDR responses and IDR delay notifications financial firms provide to 
complainants must contain these details: see RG 271.53, RG 271.66 and 
RG 271.84(a).  
RG 271.113 Firms should also provide details about how a complainant can access 
AFCA in a range of disclosure documents, including: 
(a) Financial Services Guides; 
(b) Product Disclosure Statements (PDSs), including short-form PDSs;  
(c) Credit Guides; 
(d) periodic statements (including exit statements); and  
(e) forms and notices issued under the National Credit Code. 
RG 271.114 Firms’ broader communications to consumers about their arrangements for 
managing complaints—including the publicly available complaint 
management policy, brochures explaining how to complain, relevant website 
frequently asked questions (FAQs) and call centre scripting should also 
effectively inform complainants of: 
(a) their right to take their complaint to AFCA if they are dissatisfied; and 
(b) the contact details of AFCA. 
RG 271.115 A financial firm may wish to directly refer a complaint to AFCA for 
resolution. This may occur where a firm has given an IDR response to the 
complainant, but the complaint remains unresolved and the complainant has 
not escalated it to AFCA. Firms wishing to make such a referral need to 
obtain the consent of the complainant(s) to do so: see RG 267.99. 
RG 271.116 When complaints involve hardship notices or requests for postponement of 
enforcement proceedings, interest and other default charges may continue to 
accrue. This may increase the need for financial firms to directly refer 
complaints to AFCA. The complainant’s consent to the referral also needs to 
be obtained in these circumstances: see RG 267.100.

--- PAGE 34 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 34 
D Systemic issues 
Key points 
Consumer complaints are a key risk indicator for systemic issues within a 
financial firm. The early identification and resolution of systemic issues by 
financial firms should prevent these matters being escalated to AFCA. 
Boards and owners of smaller financial firms must set clear accountabilities 
for complaints handling functions, including the management of systemic 
issues identified through consumer complaints. 
Financial firms must also have robust systems in place to ensure that 
possible systemic issues are investigated, followed up and reported on. 
Examples of systemic issues 
RG 271.117 Consumer complaints are a key risk indicator for systemic issues within a 
financial firm. A systemic issue is a matter that affects, or has the potential 
to affect, more than one consumer. Some examples include: 
(a) a disclosure document that is inadequate or misleading; 
(b) a systems issue that produces errors—for example, benefit calculation 
errors or interest calculation errors; 
(c) a unit pricing error that incorrectly allocates investment earnings to 
members; 
(d) a documented procedure that does not comply with legal 
requirements—for example, it permits privacy requirements to be 
breached; 
(e) a procedural weakness that is liable to recur; 
(f) an erroneous interpretation of a superannuation trust deed provision; 
and 
(g) a group insurance administration error that does not record cover for 
eligible members.  
How to manage systemic issues 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.118–RG 271.120 (including note) 
RG 271.118 Boards must set clear accountabilities for complaints handling functions, 
including the management of systemic issues identified through consumer 
complaints.

--- PAGE 35 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 35 
RG 271.119 If a financial firm provides reports to the board and/or executive committees, 
the reports must include metrics and analysis of consumer complaints 
including about systemic issues identified through those complaints. 
RG 271.120 Financial firms must: 
(a) encourage and enable staff to escalate possible systemic issues they 
identify from individual complaints; 
(b) regularly analyse complaint data sets to identify systemic issues; 
(c) promptly escalate possible systemic issues to appropriate areas within 
the firm for investigation and action; and 
(d) report internally on the outcome of investigations, including actions 
taken, in a timely manner.  
Note: Some smaller firms may not have escalation processes to investigate systemic 
issues. They must still act in a timely manner to investigate possible systemic issues 
identified from complaints. 
RG 271.121 If an investigation confirms that a systemic issue exists, we expect the 
financial firm to take prompt action to identify affected consumers and 
provide fair remediation. 
RG 271.122 The early identification and resolution of systemic issues by financial firms 
should prevent these matters being escalated to AFCA. AFCA also has a 
statutory responsibility to identify, refer and report systemic issues to a 
regulator where it considers that there is a systemic issue arising from its 
consideration of a complaint: see RG 267.65.  
RG 271.123 AFCA must make a report to a regulator (ASIC, the Australian Prudential 
Regulation Authority or the Australian Taxation Office) as soon as 
practicable—but no later than 15 calendar days—after AFCA considers that 
there is a systemic issue.

--- PAGE 36 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 36 
E IDR standards 
Key points 
Our IDR standards reflect the requirements for effective complaint 
management in AS/NZS 10002:2014 and other matters we consider 
relevant, given our own regulatory experience. 
We expect that our IDR standards can be adapted by financial firms to suit 
the nature, scale and complexity of their business. 
This section sets out our IDR standards for: 
• top-level commitment to effective, fair and timely complaint 
management; 
• enabling complaints; 
• resourcing; 
• responsiveness; 
• objectivity and fairness; 
• complaint management policies and procedures; 
• data collection, analysis and internal reporting; and 
• continuous improvement of the IDR process. 
Basis for the IDR standards 
RG 271.124 We expect financial firms to comply with our IDR standards for the design, 
implementation, and ongoing improvement of financial firms’ IDR 
processes. ‘Process’ refers to the totality of all procedures, documents, 
policies, resources, systems, governance and arrangements in place to 
manage complaints.  
RG 271.125 Our IDR standards reflect the requirements for effective complaint 
management set out in AS/NZS 10002:2014 and other matters we consider 
relevant given our own regulatory experience. AS/NZS 10002:2014 does not 
apply exclusively to financial services or credit, and has been drafted 
broadly so that it can: 
(a) apply to any industry in which consumers participate; and 
(b) be implemented by a business of any size. 
RG 271.126 We expect that the IDR standards can be adapted by financial firms to suit 
the nature, scale and complexity of their business.

--- PAGE 37 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 37 
Commitment and culture 
RG 271.127 We expect financial firms to develop and maintain a positive complaint 
management culture that welcomes and values complaints. A positive 
complaint management culture can produce beneficial outcomes for both 
consumers and financial firms. 
Top-level commitment 
RG 271.128 Boards (if applicable), chief executives and senior management should be 
actively interested in and support effective complaint management by: 
(a) having board and/or senior management oversight of the IDR process; 
(b) providing adequate resources, including training and support to staff 
managing complaints;  
(c) establishing and promoting a complaint management policy and 
procedure;  
(d) implementing information technology (IT) systems and reporting 
procedures to ensure timely and effective complaint management and 
monitoring; and 
(e) establishing clear roles and responsibilities for the management of 
complaints. 
People focus 
RG 271.129 The culture of the firm should: 
(a) recognise that everyone has a right to complain; and 
(b) be open to receiving complaints and demonstrate a commitment to 
resolving complaints through action. 
RG 271.130 The firm should encourage staff to treat complainants with respect, be 
helpful and adopt a user-friendly approach to complaint management. This is 
particularly important where complaints involve default notices, hardship 
notices or requests for postponement of enforcement proceedings. 
Enabling complaints 
RG 271.131 Firms should encourage complaints and make it easy for people to voice 
their concerns by developing an IDR system that is readily accessible and 
easy to use. Firms should proactively identify people who might need 
additional assistance.

--- PAGE 38 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 38 
Visibility 
RG 271.132 Firms should widely publicise information about how and where complaints 
may be made, by: 
(a) publishing their complaints policy online and making it available in hard 
copy on request. Information about the IDR process should be readily 
available, not just at the time a consumer wishes to make a complaint; 
(b) including information about the IDR process in product welcome packs. 
It is a requirement to include details about accessing the IDR process in 
Financial Services Guides, PDSs, Credit Guides and periodic statements; and 
(c) providing training to all staff, not just complaints management staff, 
about the IDR process. 
RG 271.133 Firms should also implement proactive and innovative approaches to 
promoting awareness about the IDR process and sourcing complaints from 
vulnerable people and groups. 
Accessibility 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.134 
RG 271.134 The IDR process must be easy to understand and use, including by people 
with disability or language difficulties.  
RG 271.135 This can be achieved by firms: 
(a) ensuring that information provided to the public about the IDR process 
is available in a range of languages and formats (including large print, 
Braille or audiotape);  
(b) using Australian Sign Language (AUSLAN) video presentations of 
material on their website; 
(c) enabling people to adjust the font size of information on their website;  
(d) offering text telephone (TTY) and the National Relay Service (NRS) to 
complainants; and 
(e) offering translation services to complainants or making staff available 
who are cross-culturally trained. 
RG 271.136 The process should be flexible about how complaints are lodged and offer 
multiple lodgement methods—including telephone, email, letter, social 
media, in person, or online. Complaints do not need to be in writing—in 
some cases, insisting that complaints are in written form can be a 
disincentive to the complainant. 
RG 271.137 Firms should provide a toll-free or local call telephone number.

--- PAGE 39 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 39 
RG 271.138 Firms should train staff to proactively identify, support and assist people 
who need help to make a complaint. 
RG 271.139 Firms should allow representatives to lodge complaints on behalf of 
complainants. Such representatives might include financial counsellors, legal 
representatives, family, friends and members of parliament. Firms should not 
put in place barriers to accepting authorities from these representatives. Once 
a firm is notified that a complainant has authorised a representative, the firm 
should not contact the complainant directly unless: 
(a) the complainant specifically requests direct communication with the 
firm; 
(b) the firm reasonably believes that the representative is acting against the 
complainant’s best interests; 
(c) the firm reasonably believes that the representative is acting in a 
deceptive or misleading manner with the complainant and/or the firm; 
(d) the firm reasonably believes that the representative is not authorised to 
represent the complainant; or 
(e) at the time the firm is dealing with the complaint, the representative has 
been excluded by AFCA from representing complainants in relation to 
any complaint lodged with AFCA. 
RG 271.140 Firms should continuously review the effectiveness of IDR communications. 
No charges or detriment 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.141 
RG 271.141 The IDR process must be free to complainants. We consider that: 
(a) material explaining the IDR process must be provided free of charge to 
complainants; and 
(b) complainants must be able to make or pursue their complaint via the 
IDR process free of charge. 
Resourcing 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.142 
RG 271.142 The IDR process must be resourced so that it operates fairly, effectively and 
efficiently. The financial firm must regularly review whether the IDR 
process is adequately resourced.

--- PAGE 40 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 40 
Staff numbers 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.143 
RG 271.143 Staffing numbers must be sufficient to deal with complaints in a fair and 
effective manner within maximum IDR timeframes. This includes resourcing 
the IDR function to deal with intermittent spikes in complaint volumes. 
Roles, responsibilities and empowerment 
RG 271.144 Staff expected to play a role in the firm’s IDR process include: 
(a) the chief executive (or equivalent) and senior management; 
(b) the manager responsible for the IDR process; 
(c) staff managing complaints; 
(d) business unit managers; and 
(e) frontline staff. 
RG 271.145 All staff should understand their roles and responsibilities in relation to the 
IDR process. 
Empowering staff and financial delegations 
Enforceable paragraphs: RG 271.146–RG 271.147 
RG 271.146 Firms must provide relevant staff with appropriate authority to be able to 
resolve complaints. 
RG 271.147 Firms must ensure that the authorities for determining and/or approving 
complaint outcomes (including product contract variations) and the financial 
delegations in place for paying amounts to complainants facilitate the fair 
and efficient resolution of complaints.  
Skills, attributes and training 
RG 271.148 We expect staff who deal with complaints to have the knowledge, skills and 
attributes to effectively perform their roles. This includes: 
(a) knowledge of this regulatory guide, consumer protection laws relating 
to financial products and services, AFCA approaches and relevant 
industry codes of practice; 
(b) an understanding of the products and services offered by the financial 
firm; 
(c) empathy, respect and courtesy; 
(d) awareness of cultural differences and the ability to identify and assist 
complainants who need additional assistance;

--- PAGE 41 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 41 
(e) strong verbal and written communication skills; and 
(f) analytical thinking and good judgement. 
RG 271.149 Firms should incorporate these skills and attributes into key human resource 
documents for complaint management staff, including position descriptions, 
development plans and performance assessments. 
RG 271.150 Firms should provide targeted induction and ongoing training to staff who 
handle complaints. Topics may include: 
(a) the firm’s IDR policy and process, including roles, responsibilities, 
authority and escalation points; 
(b) the requirements of this guide; 
(c) financial services consumer protection laws, AFCA position statements 
and industry codes of practice; 
(d) the firm’s products and services; 
(e) how to identify and help complainants who need additional assistance; 
(f) dealing with unreasonable complainant conduct; 
(g) effective communication and negotiation techniques; 
(h) effective written communications; 
(i) complaint data capture and internal reporting; 
(j) issues identification and analysis; and 
(k) identifying and escalating possible systemic issues. 
Materials and equipment 
RG 271.151 Firms should provide complaint management staff with adequate materials 
and equipment to handle complaints. This includes scripts, FAQs, checklists, 
sample letters and templates, specialist support materials, complaint 
management IT systems and finances. 
Health, safety and support 
RG 271.152 Firms should develop health and safety policies to support staff involved in 
complaint management. This may include: 
(a) policies and procedures for managing unreasonable conduct by 
complainants (see RG 271.170); 
(b) protecting the identity of staff where required; and 
(c) providing access to internal debriefing sessions or employee assistance 
programs.

--- PAGE 42 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 42 
Continual review 
RG 271.153 Firms should regularly review the adequacy of IDR resources. 
Responsiveness 
RG 271.154 Firms’ IDR processes should work efficiently and be capable of responding 
to each complaint in a timely and flexible manner. This includes meeting the 
maximum IDR timeframes set out in this guide. 
Early resolution 
RG 271.155 Firms should actively encourage staff to resolve complaints, wherever 
possible, at the first point of contact. 
RG 271.156 Firms’ data analysis and internal reporting should measure and actively 
monitor the volume of complaints resolved at first point of contact. 
Acknowledging complaints 
RG 271.157 Complaints should be acknowledged in accordance with the requirements set 
out at RG 271.51–RG 271.52. 
Triaging complaints 
RG 271.158 When a complaint is received, complaint management staff should assess 
and prioritise complaints according to the urgency and severity of the issues 
raised. Example of matters that should be prioritised include where: 
(a) the complainant is experiencing domestic or financial abuse; 
(b) the complainant has a serious or terminal illness; or  
(c) a delay in addressing the complaint could adversely affect the 
complainant’s basic living conditions. 
Responding flexibly 
RG 271.159 Firms should deal with complaints with as little formality as possible and 
avoid requirements (e.g. that a complaint must be lodged in writing) that 
restrict complainants’ access to the IDR process. 
RG 271.160 Firms should adopt a range of flexible complaint management approaches 
that promote early resolution, wherever appropriate.

--- PAGE 43 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 43 
Remedies 
RG 271.161 Firms should consider a broad range of possible remedies when attempting 
to resolve complaints. Remedies may include: 
(a) an explanation of the circumstances giving rise to the complaint; 
(b) an apology; 
(c) provision of assistance and support; 
(d) a refund or waiver of a fee or charge; 
(e) a goodwill payment; 
(f) a payment of compensation; 
(g) a waiver of a debt; 
(h) replacing damaged or lost property; 
(i) correcting incorrect or out-of-date records; 
(j) repairing physical damage to property; 
(k) changing the terms of a contract; 
(l) ceasing legal or other action that may cause detriment; and 
(m) undertaking to set in place improvements to systems, procedures or products. 
RG 271.162 Firms should ensure that any agreed resolution outcomes are implemented in 
a timely manner when a complaint is closed. 
Maximum IDR timeframes 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.163 
RG 271.163 Financial firms must adhere to our requirements for issuing IDR responses 
within maximum IDR timeframes: see RG 271.56–RG 271.101. 
Closing complaints 
RG 271.164 When closing a complaint, firms should record the complaint outcome, 
complaint remedy and financial compensation amount (if any).  
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.165 
RG 271.165 Firms must ensure that complaint resolution outcomes (e.g. refunds, fee 
waivers, correction of records, compensation payments) are implemented in 
a timely manner when a complaint is closed.

--- PAGE 44 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 44 
Objectivity and fairness 
RG 271.166 We expect firms to develop processes that ensure each complaint is managed 
fairly, objectively and without actual or perceived bias. 
Objectivity 
RG 271.167 Financial firms should manage complaints objectively and without actual or 
perceived bias. This requires that: 
(a) IDR processes allow adequate opportunity for each party to make their case; 
(b) wherever possible, the complaint is considered by staff not involved in 
the subject matter of the complaint. We recognise that this will not 
always be possible for a small financial firm; 
RG 271.168 IDR processes allow for other persons who may request an information return 
(e.g. beneficiaries), and who may reasonably have an interest in the outcome 
of a traditional services complaint, to be identified, notified and their views 
considered, where relevant to the efficient and fair handling of the complaint. 
Privacy 
RG 271.169 Firms need to have processes and systems in place to ensure that they 
comply with their obligations under privacy laws when dealing with 
complaints.  
Unreasonable complainant conduct 
RG 271.170 Each complaint should be managed in an equitable manner, including those 
lodged by complainants who display unreasonable or challenging behaviour. 
Firms should develop a policy for dealing with unreasonable or challenging 
complainant conduct. 
Note: For more information about dealing with unreasonable conduct by complainants, 
see Appendix E to AS/NZS 10002:2014. 
Postponement of action 
RG 271.171 Where appropriate, financial firms should postpone actions that could 
adversely affect the complainant until the complaint has been finalised and 
an IDR response has been provided: see RG 271.92–RG 271.101 regarding 
the postponement of legal proceedings or other enforcement action while the 
financial firm is considering a hardship notice or request to postpone 
enforcement proceedings.

--- PAGE 45 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 45 
Policy and procedures 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.172 
RG 271.172 Complaint management documentation is a key component of a financial 
firm’s IDR process. Firms must have a publicly available, readily accessible 
complaints policy and an internal complaint management procedure. Firms 
must provide material that explains their IDR process free of charge to 
complainants. 
Public complaints policy 
RG 271.173 A firm’s complaints policy should explain: 
(a) how consumers may lodge a complaint with the firm (e.g. online, by 
email, by phone and in person); 
(b) the options available to assist complainants who might need additional 
assistance to lodge a complaint; 
(c) the firm’s key steps for dealing with complaints, including 
acknowledgement, assessment and investigation, and provision of an 
IDR response; 
(d) response timeframes; and 
(e) details about accessing AFCA where a complaint is not resolved. 
RG 271.174 The complaints policy should be readily available to the public, in a range of 
formats and languages. In particular, the policy should appear on the firm’s 
website in an accessible location. 
Internal complaint management procedure 
RG 271.175 Firms should have a documented internal complaint management procedure 
to support the public complaint management policy. 
RG 271.176 The procedure should be a comprehensive and useful tool for staff who deal 
with complaints, providing a step-by-step guide to the entire IDR process, 
and clearly setting out staff roles and responsibilities.  
RG 271.177 The internal complaint management procedure should be anchored to the 
IDR requirements set out in this regulatory guide, including the IDR 
standards. At a minimum, we expect a firm’s internal procedure to address 
our requirements for: 
(a) the definition of ‘complaint’ and the types of matters that must be dealt 
with in accordance with our IDR requirements (see RG 271.27) 
(b) proactively identifying and assisting complainants who might need 
additional assistance (see RG 271.131–RG 271.141); 
(c) acknowledging complaints (see RG 271.51–RG 271.52);

--- PAGE 46 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 46 
(d) assessing and prioritising complaints according to the urgency of the 
issues raised (see RG 271.158); 
(e) dealing with unreasonable complainant conduct (see RG 271.170); 
(f) investigating complaints, conducting negotiations and exploring 
resolution options, including appropriate remedies (see RG 271.159–
RG 271.160); 
(g) providing an IDR response within maximum IDR timeframes (see 
RG 271.56–RG 271.101); 
(h) the content of IDR responses, including reasons for decision (see 
RG 271.53–RG 271.55); 
(i) closing complaints (see RG 271.164–RG 271.165); 
(j) identifying and escalating systemic issues and complaint trends (see 
Section D); and 
(k) reporting internally about complaints (see RG 271.183–RG 271.184).  
Regular review 
RG 271.178 Firms should regularly review the adequacy of complaint management 
documentation, including the complaints policy and internal procedure. 
Data collection, analysis and internal reporting 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.179 
RG 271.179 Firms must record all complaints that they receive. They must have an 
effective system for recording information about complaints. The system 
must enable firms to keep track of the progress of each complaint.  
RG 271.180 Firms should design their complaints system to suit the nature, scale and 
complexity of their business, including the number of complaints they 
receive. Firms that receive few complaints might, for example, use a 
spreadsheet. We expect firms with large volumes of complaints to use 
specialised complaints software or to integrate complaint management data 
fields into existing customer relationship management systems. 
Conduct ongoing data analysis 
RG 271.181 Firms should analyse complaint data regularly so that they can: 
(a) monitor the performance of the IDR process; 
(b) identify possible systemic issues and areas where product or service 
delivery improvements are required; and

--- PAGE 47 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 47 
(c) identify matters that are likely to need to be reported to ASIC under 
s912D of the Corporations Act.  
RG 271.182 To monitor the performance of the IDR process, firms should collect and 
analyse the following items of data (at a minimum) at regular intervals: 
(a) number of complaints received; 
(b) number of complaints closed; 
(c) nature of complaints (e.g. product and problem); 
(d) time taken to acknowledge complaints; 
(e) time taken to resolve or finalise complaints;  
(f) complaint outcomes, including: 
(i) number of complaints resolved; 
(ii) number of complaints unresolved; 
(iii) number of complaints abandoned/withdrawn; and 
(iv) details of amounts paid to complainants to resolve complaints; 
(g) possible systemic issues identified; and 
(h) number of complaints escalated to AFCA. 
Report complaints data internally and publicly 
Enforceable paragraph: RG 271.183 
RG 271.183 Financial firms must provide reports about complaints data regularly to 
senior management and the firm’s board (or equivalent).  
RG 271.184 These reports should include: 
(a) the number of complaints received; 
(b) the number of complaints closed; 
(c) the circumstances giving rise to complaints (e.g. products, services, and 
issues and reasons); 
(d) the time taken to acknowledge complaints; 
(e) the time taken to resolve or finalise complaints; 
(f) complaint outcomes, including: 
(i) the number of complaints resolved; 
(ii) the number of complaints unresolved; 
(iii) the number of complaints that were abandoned or withdrawn; and 
(iv) details of amounts paid to complainants to resolve complaints; 
(g) possible systemic issues identified; 
(h) the underlying causes of complaints;

--- PAGE 48 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 48 
(i) complaint trends; 
(j) the number of complaints escalated to AFCA; and 
(k) recommendations for improving products or services.  
RG 271.185 Firms should also report on complaints in their annual reports, if applicable. 
Continuous improvement 
RG 271.186 Firms should monitor and review the performance of their IDR process. This 
includes monitoring of complaint metrics, ongoing quality assurance and 
regular reviews. 
Complaint metrics and monitoring 
RG 271.187 Firms should monitor the key metrics for complaint management set out in 
RG 271.182 on an ongoing basis.  
Quality assurance 
RG 271.188 Firms should carry out regular and ongoing quality assurance of complaint 
management activity by frontline and specialist complaints teams, including 
monitoring whether: 
(a) complaints are being recorded in the firm’s complaint management system; 
(b) telephone contact and correspondence with complainants is clear and 
consumer focused; 
(c) complaint outcomes are fair; and 
(d) complainants are being provided with their escalation options, including 
AFCA. 
Compliance audits 
RG 271.189 Firms should conduct regular compliance audits to identify and address 
issues of non-conformity with this regulatory guide and internal 
requirements. 
RG 271.190 Unless the number of complaints is very small, we would expect compliance 
audits to be undertaken at least annually. Where non-compliance with this 
regulatory guide is identified, appropriate action should be taken—such as 
performance feedback, re-training and enhanced supervision for complaints 
management staff and, where appropriate, rectification for the complainants 
adversely affected by the non-compliance.

--- PAGE 49 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 49 
Customer advocate recommendations 
RG 271.191 Firms with customer advocates should genuinely consider any 
recommendations made by customer advocates to improve the IDR process.  
RG 271.192 There should be a transparent internal process for responding to 
recommendations made by customer advocates.  
Review program 
RG 271.193 Senior management should conduct or arrange regular reviews of the IDR 
process to: 
(a) consider the suitability, effectiveness and efficiency of the IDR system; 
(b) assess whether systemic issues are being promptly identified and 
remedial action taken to address the issues; 
(c) assess whether the remedial action is prioritised and effective;  
(d) identify improvements that need to be made; and 
(e) assess customer satisfaction (e.g. through surveys). 
RG 271.194 For a smaller firm with few complaints, senior management could undertake 
the IDR process review in conjunction with the compliance audit. 
RG 271.195 For a larger firm, the internal audit function or an appropriately qualified 
independent consultant could undertake the IDR process review.  
RG 271.196 The financial firm should develop a plan to action review recommendations. 
These actions should be tracked by senior management to ensure that 
sustainable improvements are made. 
Other improvement activities 
RG 271.197 Firms should also consider other improvement activities, including: 
(a) conducting benchmarking exercises; 
(b) establishing a feedback mechanism for staff to record improvement 
opportunities; 
(c) encouraging innovation in complaint management practices; and 
(d) recognising and rewarding exemplary management of complaints.

--- PAGE 50 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 50 
Key terms  
Term Meaning in this document 
AFCA Australian Financial Complaints Authority—The EDR 
scheme for which an authorisation under Pt 7.10A of the 
Corporations Act is in force 
AFCA Rules Complaint Resolution Scheme Rules—A document 
setting out AFCA’s jurisdiction and procedures, to which 
financial firms are contractually bound 
AFS licence An Australian financial services licence under s913B of 
the Corporations Act that authorises a person who carries 
on a financial services business to provide financial 
services 
Note: This is a definition contained in s761A of the 
Corporations Act. 
AFS licensee A person who holds an Australian financial services 
licence under s913B of the Corporations Act 
ASIC Australian Securities and Investments Commission 
AS/NZS 10002:2014 Australian Standard AS/NZS 10002:2014 Guidelines for 
complaint management in organizations 
carried over 
instrument 
Has the meaning given in s4 of the National Consumer 
Credit Protection (Transitional and Consequential 
Provisions) Act 2009 
complaint An expression of dissatisfaction made to or about an 
organisation—related to its products, services, staff or the 
handling of a complaint—where a response or resolution 
is explicitly or implicitly expected or legally required 
Note: This is the definition given in AS/NZS 10002:2014. 
consumer or 
complainant 
A person or small business. It includes, at a minimum:  
 an individual consumer or guarantor;  
 a superannuation fund member or third-party 
beneficiary eligible to make a complaint to AFCA under 
s1053, or taken to be a member of a regulated 
superannuation fund or approved deposit fund, or a 
holder of an RSA, as provided for by s1053A; and 
 a ‘small business’ as defined in modified s761G of the 
Corporations Act.  
Corporations Act Corporations Act 2001, including regulations made for the 
purposes of that Act 
Corporations 
Regulations 
Corporations Regulations 2001

--- PAGE 51 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 51 
Term Meaning in this document 
credit Credit to which the National Credit Code applies 
Note: See s3 and 5-6 of the National Credit Code. 
credit activity (or 
credit activities) 
Has the meaning given in s6 of the National Credit Act 
credit contract Has the meaning given in s4 of the National Credit Code 
Credit Guide A document that must be provided to a consumer by a 
credit provider, credit service provider, credit 
representative or debt collector under the National Credit 
Act 
credit licence An Australian credit licence under s35 of the National 
Credit Act that authorises a licensee to engage in 
particular credit activities 
credit licensee A person who holds an Australian credit licence under 
s35 of the National Credit Act 
credit provider Has the meaning given in s5 of the National Credit Act 
credit representative A person authorised to engage in specified credit 
activities on behalf of a credit licensee under s64(2) or 
65(2) of the National Credit Act 
credit service Has the meaning given in s7 of the National Credit Act 
credit service provider A person who provides credit services 
death benefit 
decision-maker 
Has the meaning given in s761A of the Corporations Act 
declined insurance 
claim 
This includes where an insured person (the retail client) 
makes a claim on an insurance policy and the insurer: 
 declines or does not accept the claim; or 
 does not determine the claim within 10 business days 
of receiving all the information necessary to do so 
disputant Has the same meaning as complainant 
dispute Has the same meaning as complaint 
EDR External dispute resolution 
ERS exemption Enhanced regulatory sandbox exemption—A conditional 
licensing exemption provided under Corporations 
(FinTech Sandbox Australian Financial Services Licence 
Exemption) Regulations 2020 and National Consumer 
Credit Protection (FinTech Sandbox Australian Credit 
Licence Exemption) Regulations 2020. The exemption 
allows natural persons and businesses to test certain 
innovative financial services or credit activities without 
first obtaining an AFS licence or credit licence 
exempt SPFEs Exempt special purpose funding entities

--- PAGE 52 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 52 
Term Meaning in this document 
financial firm Firms covered by s912A(1)(g) and 1017G(1) of the 
Corporations Act, s47(1)(h) of the National Credit Act, 
s47(1) of the RSA Act and s101(1) of the SIS Act: 
 AFS licensees; 
 unlicensed product issuers; 
 unlicensed secondary sellers; 
 credit licensees; 
 trustees of regulated superannuation funds (other than 
SMSFs); 
 trustees of approved deposit funds; and 
 RSA providers 
Note 1: We may require other financial entities that are 
exempt from the requirement to hold a licence to have an IDR 
process that complies with the standards and requirements 
that apply to licensees. For example, fintech businesses 
relying on the ERS exemption. 
Note 2: Unlicensed COI lenders are a type of financial firm. 
The IDR obligations set out in this guide apply to unlicensed 
COI lenders, but they are not required to be a member of 
AFCA.  
financial product Generally a facility through which, or through the acquisition 
of which, a person does one or more of the following: 
 makes a financial investment (see s763B); 
 manages financial risk (see s763C); 
 makes non-cash payments (see 763D) 
Note: Div 3 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Act for the exact 
definition. 
financial service Has the meaning given in Div 4 of Pt 7.1 of the 
Corporations Act 
Financial Services 
Guide 
A document required by s941A or 941B to be given in 
accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.7 of Corporations Act 
Note: This is a definition contained in s761A. 
fintech Financial technology 
hardship notice Means: 
 for credit contracts entered into before 1 March 2013, 
to which the National Credit Code applies, an application 
for a change to the terms of the contract for hardship; and 
 for credit contracts or leases entered into on or after 
1 March 2013, to which the National Credit Code 
applies, a hardship notice under s72 or 177B (as 
modified by the National Consumer Credit Protection 
Amendment (Enhancements) Act 2012)  
IDR Internal dispute resolution

--- PAGE 53 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 53 
Term Meaning in this document 
IDR procedures (or 
IDR processes) 
The internal dispute resolution procedures that meet the 
requirements and standards made and approved by ASIC 
under RG 271 and 
ASIC Corporations, Credit and 
Superannuation (Internal Dispute Resolution) Instrument 
2020/98 
IDR response A written response to a complaint, which must be given to 
the complainant in accordance with RG 271.53–
RG 271.55 
INFO 110 (for 
example) 
An ASIC information sheet (in this example numbered 
110) 
information return A trustee company providing traditional services must 
give certain information to beneficiaries, settlors of trusts, 
and certain other parties within 30 calendar days of a 
request. 
Such information must include: 
 the income earned on the trust’s assets; 
 the expenses of the trust, including remuneration, 
commission or other benefits received by the trustee 
company; and 
 the net value of the trust’s assets 
Note: See s601RAC1(e) of the Corporations Act and 
regs 5D.2.01, 5D.2.02 and 7.1.28A of the Corporations 
Regulations. 
multi-tiered IDR 
processes 
IDR processes that include internal appeals or escalation 
mechanisms 
National Credit Act National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 
National Credit Code National Credit Code at Sch 1 to the National Credit Act 
National Credit 
Regulations 
National Consumer Credit Protection Regulations 2010 
PDS A Product Disclosure Statement—a document that must 
be given to a retail client for the offer or issue of a 
financial product in accordance with Div 2 of Pt 7.9 of the 
Corporations Act 
Note: See s761A for the exact definition. 
primary producer A primary production business within the meaning of 
s995.1(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 
Note: This is the meaning given in the AFCA Rules. 
Ramsay Review Review of the financial system external dispute resolution 
and complaints framework 
Ramsay Review final 
report 
Final report: Review of the financial system external 
dispute resolution and complaints framework (May 2017)

--- PAGE 54 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 54 
Term Meaning in this document 
reg 16 (for example) A regulation of a set of regulations as specified (in this 
example numbered 16) 
retail client A client as defined in s761G of the Corporations Act and 
Div 2 of Pt 7.1 of the Corporations Regulations 
RG 267 (for example) An ASIC regulatory guide (in this example numbered 
267) 
RSA A retirement savings account as defined in the RSA Act 
RSA Act Retirement Savings Accounts Act 1997 
s64 (for example) A section of the Corporations Act, unless otherwise 
specified (in this example numbered 64) 
SIS Act Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
securitisation body Means a ‘special purpose funding entity’ (as defined in s5 
of the National Credit Act), which includes both: 
 a securitisation entity; and 
 a fund raising special purpose entity 
Note: See the definition of each of the above terms in s5 of the 
National Credit Act (as modified by item 3.4 of Sch 3 to the 
National Credit Regulations). 
servicing agreement An agreement between a securitisation body and a credit 
licensee, as defined in s5 of the National Credit Act (as 
modified by item 3.4 of Sch 3 to the National Credit 
Regulations) 
small business Has the meaning given in the modified s761G of the 
Corporations Act  
SMSF A self-managed superannuation fund 
SPFE A special purpose funding entity 
traditional services Means traditional trustee company services, as defined 
by s601RAC of the Corporations Act 
unlicensed COI 
lender 
Has the meaning given in s5 of the National Credit Act, 
as modified by item 2.4 of Sch 2 to the National Credit 
Regulations 
unlicensed product 
issuer 
An issuer of a financial product who is not an AFS 
licensee 
unlicensed secondary 
seller 
A person who offers the secondary sale of a financial 
product under s1012C(5), (6) or (8) of the Corporations 
Act and who is not an AFS licensee 
value of an insurance 
claim 
Means the monetary amount or value to be paid out to an 
insured person (the retail client) under an insurance 
policy, once the insured person has made a claim on the 
policy

--- PAGE 55 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 55 
Related information 
Headnotes  
AFCA, AFS licence, AFS licensees, Australian Financial Complaints 
Authority, complaint, complainant, consumer, credit licensees, credit 
representatives, dispute resolution requirements, EDR, external dispute 
resolution, financial firms, financial services, IDR processes, IDR standards, 
IDR requirements, internal dispute resolution, maximum timeframes, multi-
tier IDR processes, remediation processes, reporting requirements, small 
business, superannuation trustees, systemic issues, traditional trustee  
Regulatory guides 
RG 139 Approval and oversight of external dispute resolution schemes 
Note: RG 139 has been replaced by RG 267. We will withdraw RG 139 when the last 
complaints made to the Financial Ombudsman Service (FOS) and Credit and 
Investments Ombudsman (CIO) are closed.  
RG 165 Licensing: Internal and external dispute resolution 
Note: RG 165 applies to complaints received by financial firms before 5 October 2021, 
when RG 271 comes into effect. We will withdraw RG 165 on 5 October 2022.  
RG 205 Credit licensing: General conduct obligations 
RG 206 Credit licensing: Competence and training 
RG 207 Credit licensing: Financial requirements 
RG 267 Oversight of the Australian Financial Complaints Authority 
Information sheets 
INFO 105 FAQs—Dealing with consumers and credit 
INFO 110 Lenders with carried over instruments 
INFO 248 Enhanced regulatory sandbox 
Consultation papers 
CP 311 Internal dispute resolution: Update to RG 165

--- PAGE 56 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 56 
Reports 
REP 603 The consumer journey through the Internal Dispute Resolution 
process of financial service providers 
REP 665 Response to submissions on CP 311 Internal dispute resolution: 
Update to RG 165 
Legislative instruments 
ASIC Corporations, Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute 
Resolution) Instrument 2020/98 
ASIC Corporations, Credit and Superannuation (Internal Dispute 
Resolution—Transitional) Instrument 2019/965 
[CO 14/41] Extension of transitional credit hardship provisions 
Legislation 
Acts Interpretation Act 1901, s36 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001, s1 and 12A 
Corporations Act, Ch 7; s601RAB, 601RAC, 760A, 761G, 912A, 912D, 
1012C, 1017G, 1053, 1053A, 1056  
Corporations Regulations, regs 5D.2.01, 5D.2.02, 7.1.28A, 7.6.02, 7.9.77  
Corporations (FinTech Sandbox Australian Financial Services Licence 
Exemption) Regulations 2020 
Family Law Act 1975 
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997, s995.1 
National Credit Act, s5, 47, 64, 65; National Credit Code, s72, 73, 88, 94, 
95, 177B, 177C, 179H, 179J, 208; National Consumer Credit Protection 
(Transitional and Consequential Provisions) Act 2009, s4. 
National Credit Regulations, regs 3, 6, 10, 16, 23B, 23C, 25E, 86, 105K; 
Schs 2 and 3; Forms 12, 12A, 18A; National Consumer Credit Protection 
Amendment Regulation 2013 (No. 1)  
National Consumer Credit Protection (FinTech Sandbox Australian Credit 
Licence Exemption) Regulations 2020 
RSA Act, s47 
SIS Act, s101 
Treasury Laws Amendment (Putting Consumers First—Establishment of the 
Australian Financial Complaints Authority) Act 2018

--- PAGE 57 ---

REGULATORY GUIDE 271: Internal dispute resolution 
© Australian Securities and Investments Commission September 2021 Page 57 
Media and other releases 
18-371MR ASIC research highlights need for improved consumer 
complaints experience 
19-115MR Doing the right thing by your customers: ASIC consults on lifting 
standards and transparency of complaints handling 
Other documents 
AFCA, Complaint Resolution Scheme Rules 
Australian Standard AS/NZS 10002:2014 Guidelines for complaint 
management in organizations  
Ramsay Review, Final report: Review of the financial system external 
dispute resolution and complaints framework, May 2017